---
title: Arumoy Shome
---

I am a researcher at [TU Delft](https://www.tudelft.nl/en/), working
towards my doctorate as part of the [Software Engineering Research
Group](https://se.ewi.tudelft.nl/). My research interests lie at the
intersection of Data Science, Software Engineering and Design. Here I
am developing tools, techniques and best practises which allow us to
build, test, deploy, scale and maintain modern software systems with
Machine Learning (ML) components. While we must look to the micro to
identify and understand a problem, I try to keep an eye towards the
current era of big-data and large-scale ML as a long-term area of
research. You can find a list of my publications [here](publications).

I completed my Msc. in Computer Science from the [Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam](https://www.vu.nl/en) and [Universiteit van
Amsterdam](https://www.uva.nl/en) in the Netherlands, specializing in
Big Data Engineering. As part of my thesis, I conducted
interdisciplinary research with [Nikhef](https://www.nikhef.nl/en/)
and [The Netherlands eScience Center](https://www.esciencecenter.nl/)
to improve the data processing pipeline of the [KM3NeT Neutrino
Telescope](https://www.km3net.org/) using Graph Convolutional Neural
Networks.

I obtained my Bachelor's in The Applied Sciences from the [University
of Waterloo](https://uwaterloo.ca/) in Canada, specializing in System
Design Engineering with an option in Entrepreneurship. Here, I learned
to bring creative solutions to complex problems with multiple facets
such as society, economics, environment and politics. I also learned
how to nurture an idea at it's inception, develop it using systems
theory and successfully bring it to the market as a finished product.

My professional experience is two pronged. I have over 5 years of
software development experience through professional web development
positions at [large and small
companies](https://linkedin.com/in/arumoyshome). I am also versed with
[data driven, research oriented projects](projects) rooted in diverse
topics such as Large Scale Data Engineering, Data Visualization and
Artificial Intelligence. One such project, ACE: Art, Color and
Emotions was published as part of the [ACM International Conference on
Multimedia,
2019](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3343031.3350588). You can
     find more details about my professional experience in my
     Curriculum Vitae[[html](cv)][[pdf](assets/pdf/cv-redacted.pdf)].

I enjoy sharing knowledge and having discussions and am always happy
to [engage with other publicly](talks). Sometimes, I [write about my
day-to-day challenges](blogs) as a software engineering, data
scientist & researcher. All materials (excluding links to external
websites or third party products) on this website are open sourced
under the [Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 3.0 license](license).

[[email](mailto:contact@arumoy.me)][[Github](https://github.com/arumoy-shome)][[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arumoyshome/)]
