---
title: Publications
---

This page contains links to my scientific publications.

# [2022] Data Smells in Public Datasets

*Python, Pandas, Matplotlib, org-mode*

The adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in high-stakes domains
such as healthcare, wildlife preservation, autonomous driving and
criminal justice system calls for a data-centric approach to AI. Data
scientists spend the majority of their time studying and wrangling the
data, yet tools to aid them with data analysis are lacking. This study
identifies the recurrent data quality issues in public datasets.
Analogous to code smells, we introduce a novel catalogue of data
smells that can be used to indicate early signs of problems or
technical debt in machine learning systems. To understand the
prevalence of data quality issues in datasets, we analyse 25 public
datasets and identify 14 data smells.

[[Preprint](LINKME)] [[Publication](LINKME)]

```bibtex
TODO
```
# [2019] ACE: Art, Color and Emotions

*JavaScript, D3.js*

Art has been the cornerstone of human expression and social progress
through time. It is no wonder that art historians and daily
enthusiasts alike have spent countless hours trying to understand more
than what meets the eye. What an individual can draw from a painting
is very subjective, but we now know that human mind has a high
sensibility for well-defined subset of traits - one of them being
colour. This paper describes the process of bringing a new light on
how colours and emotional tone (sentiment) can be interlaced with one
another. This is achieved with the use of widespread artificial
intelligence techniques, a vast dataset of art meta-data(OmniArt) and
state-of-the-art visual interaction tools.

[[Paper](assets/pdf/ace.pdf)][[Publication](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3343031.3350588)]

```bibtex
@inproceedings{strezoski2019ace,
  title		={Ace: Art, color and emotion},
  author	={Strezoski, Gjorgji and Shome, Arumoy and Bianchi, Riccardo and Rao, Shruti and Worring, Marcel},
  booktitle	={Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia},
  pages		={1053--1055},
  year		={2019}
}
```
