---
title: Talks
---

Following is a list of talks I have given in the past.


# 2022-05-16 Mon Data Validation with TFDV

In this lecture we will go over the basics of data validation. The first
half of this lecture will be a talk on the fundamentals of data
validation. We will answer *what is data validation?*, *why should we
validate our data?* and *how we can validate our data?*. The second half
of the lecture will be a hands-on tutorial on using [Tensorflow Data
Validation](https://github.com/tensorflow/data-validation), instructions
& code for which can be found on [this github
repo](https://github.com/arumoy-shome/remla).

[[html](2022-05-16--talk--remla-data-validation)]

# 2022-05-04 Wed Data Smells in Public Datasets

In this talk I will present our recent paper titled *Data Smells in
Public Datasets* which was published at the *[1^st^ International
Conference on AI Engineering (CAIN)
2022](https://conf.researchr.org/home/cain-2022)*. I will first present
the problem we are trying to solve along with the contributions that we
made. I will present the methodology which was followed along with the
results obtained. I will present a select few smells which I personally
find interesting & hope will generate some discussion. Finally, we will
conclude the talk with some high level takeaways from our study along
with the limitations & future directions of work.

[[html](2022-05-04--talk--data-smells-public-datasets)]

# 2021-09-07 Privacy Preserving Deep Learning

A talk on Privacy Preserving Deep Learning (PPDL) I gave to my research
group. It was largly based on a literature review I did during my Msc.

[[html](2021-09-07--talk--privacy-preserving-deep-learning)]

# 2021-07-12 Research Workflow in Plaintext

In this talk I will go over how we can use Emacs and org-mode to craft a
research workflow. We will look at how we can leverage the power of
Emacs and org-mode to capture, store, search and retrieve research data,
all in plain text! The talk will touch upon how org-mode can be used as
an environment for literate programming and reproducible research. I do
not assume any prior knowledge of emacs or org-mode and I want this to
be more of a discussion rather than a talk. Please ask me questions as I
go along and share your thoughts, tips and techniques with others!

[[html](2021-07-12--talk--research-workflow-in-plaintext)]
